>> Kyle Simpson: Our next
discussion is on immutability.
Now this word immutability
is often taken to be
meaning something that we don't mean here.
And so I wanna clear up some confusion
around what is immutability.
What does it mean to
the functional programming?
When I say the word immutability,
I bet at least some of you
thought of the const keyword.
And that's where the misconceptions
can get a little bit out of hand.
So I wanna talk about this for a minute.
If I declare var x = 2,
like I'm doing on line 1, and
then I say x++,
>> Kyle Simpson: What I'm really doing is
not changing the value of 2, the way
most people would probably describe.
What I'm actually doing is
reassigning x to a different value.
Vars can be reassigned.
If I try line 4, I declare a const y, and
then I try line 5 to reassign the y.
I get an error because reassignment
of a constant is not allowed.
Now if I were to ask, if I were to pull
all of you, tell me what is a constant.
Many times when I ask that question,
the answer I get back is it's
a value that doesn't change.
From a dictionary definition perspective,
that seems reasonable.
But from a programming perspective that's
not what we mean when we say constant.
When we use the word const what we
actually mean is nothing to do with
the value.
What we mean is the variable
itself can be reassigned.
>> Kyle Simpson: In other words, the const
keyword is about assignment mutability or,
in this case, assignment immutability.
>> Kyle Simpson: So when a functional
programmer talks about immutability,
are they really talking about
assignment immutability?
I'm gonna make the case that
assignment immutability,
that is what we get with the const
keyword, is almost, almost, irrelevant.
It almost doesn't matter.
There is a slight,
slight benefit to being able to say,
in a variable,
this variable cannot be reassigned.
I'm not gonna fully dig into this
cuz we cover this in another course
the [INAUDIBLE] JS foundations.
I've also covered in detail and
in many of my writings, blogs, and books.
But assignment mutability is like
1% of the problem, because there's
only a small portion of your code that
can actually change the variable.
That can actually reassign it.
If you use the const keyword inside
of a block that's ten lines long and
you're program is a million lines long,
there's only nine other lines that
could possibly reassign that variable
because const is blocked scope.
So that other 9,999,000, whatever it
is number of code can't effect it.
So assignment mutability there is actually
not a big deal cuz you can just see
the ten lines and
know that it doesn't get reassigned.
There's only a tiny benefit
to saying on line 1,
I'm not gonna reassign it
on the very next line.
But if we talk about immutability
from the perspective of the value,
that's where things are a lot more
interesting and a lot more important.
So I would argue in a functional
programmer insists that we have
immutability, they rarely
are meaning assignment immutability.
What they really mean
is value immutability.
The const keyword doesn't
give us value immutability.
As you can see when I declare z as
a cost and I put an array in it.
An array is a mutable value,
it can be mutated.
When I declare it with const, the only
thing that's disallowed is line 8.
I can't reassign z, but
I can absolutely still mutate the value.
So if you declare an array,
assign it with a const, and
then pass that array somewhere,
guess what?
Somebody can change that array.
The fact that you declared it with a const
didn't give you any benefit whatsoever,
cuz they can mutate
the contents of that array.
Value mutability is a huge problem.
When we pass around values by reference,
like we do in JavaScript arrays and
objects, when we pass those around and
anybody's free to mutate whatever
they want, that creates havoc.
Or more specifically to what
we've taught in this course,
it lowers your level of confidence as
to what any line of code is gonna do.
When you pass in an array,
you don't have very much confidence
that somebody's not gonna change it.
Does that makes sense?
The mutation of a value is a big deal.
So it turns out if we'd like to increase
our confidence on the value mutation,
the const keyword isn't
gonna do us any help at all.
It is the potential to set those landmines
where people are gonna be confused,
thinking it's making an immutable
value when it isn't.
So its benefit is dubious at best.
I would put it in the negative
category but at best, it's neutral.
It's not really providing the help that it
wants, but there are things that do help.
That const keyword is not helping here.
That const keyword does not really help
me that much to tell me that these
other six lines in this
block aren't gonna reassign.
Is the const y really that
much more readable than
the var x in the very next line?
Neither one of them get reassigned.
Does the const really help that much?
It doesn't help that much.
And it certainly doesn't help us with
z if we were to make z a const, and
then pass that array in somewhere.
It's not gonna help prevent
that array from being mutated.
On the other hand, if we do wanna
make a value that is immutable,
we have a built-in utility as
of ES5 called Object.freeze().
That'll take an array or an object and
freeze all of its properties so
that they're read-only,
they can't be changed.
It'll freeze the object so you can't
add or remove properties from it.
It effectively makes
a read-only data structure.
It's shallow, it only works on
the top level of that object.
So here, I have a nested array object
with 7,8,9, that one is still mutable.
But as a nice, quick, and dirty way of
making myself a value that is itself
immutable so that I can pass it somewhere
and have a higher degree of confidence,
Object.freeze is a nice, straightforward
and fairly performant way of doing that.
>> Kyle Simpson: There was a question?
>> Speaker 2: I just have a quick personal
question for const, at least, and
maybe it'll cover this, but
do you think there's some value in using
const as a signal for readability?
As saying hey, don't mutate this or
is that just, I mean-
>> Kyle Simpson: So
the question being asked is,
does const offer any benefit?
I was kind of skating over it but
we can drill into this point.
In this code snippet,
is the const keyword actually helping
with the readability of this code?
Is it actually helping you to know
that y is not gonna get reassigned on
any of those other six lines of code?
My point is I don't think it's
actually helping that much.
Maybe you could squint at it and
say, well, it's sort of a little,
tiny bit helpful.
But it certainly has the precedent,
not just in JavaScript, but
in every other language that's
ever had a const keyword.
People have been confused that it creates
immutable values when actually it just
creates immutable bindings.
And that confusion is powerful.
There are tens of thousands of
questions on Stack Overflow
where people are frustrated
by this const keyword.
So there's two things that you could
assert about const usage here.
One thing that you could assert is that
the const is telling a future developer
that may maintain or
modify this code, don't reassign y.
That's one argument that I've heard made.
I want us to play out that
scenario in our head.
Let's say you've hired a new junior
developer onto the team, and
you've told them to put a blue
button on the e-commerce page,
and they show up with this piece of code.
And somewhere on line 5 or 6, they changed
the value of y, and they run the program
and they get an error, and
it says sorry, you can't reassign y.
What are the odds that that person
is gonna say I have to completely
rethink how I was gonna do this,
because I am not allowed to reassign y,
versus going up to line 2 and
changing it from const to let or var.
Which one of those two do you
think is a more likely scenario?
There's nothing about const
that makes it set in stone.
You could give the signal
please don't do that.
But there's lots of other cultural and
societal ways that we can communicate
intent besides having a keyword
that has potential confusion to it.
You could have put a constant, I mean
a comment there that says don't change it.
Really, really promise, don't change it.
Now, the second thing that is
often asserted a lot const is,
not that it prevents you from changing it,
but that it says I won't change it.
It tells you what the author's intent was.
Don't worry,
it's not gonna get reassigned.
So, therefore,
when you start reading through it,
you don't have to worry about why ever
being reassigned in that block of code?
And that's what I was getting at earlier.
Does that really help that much,
because there's only a few lines of
code where it ever could be reassigned.
And generally, you can quickly glance at
those lines and get the same information.
If y does not show up on
the left-hand side of an equals,
it's not getting reassigned.
So I don't know that the const is
really actually adding anything.
And if it is,
it's a very small amount at best.
>> Kyle Simpson: That's my take.
Others do that calculation differently,
but for me,
the const keyword is not that helpful.
Doesn't mean I don't use it, but
I only use it when there's
already an immutable value.
And I only use it when I'm specifically
saying something like const
pi equals 3.14.
Something that's clearly a constant.
That's the only time I use that keyword.
I do not declare mutable
values like arrays with const.
I do not make functions with const.
I don't do any of that stuff.
>> Kyle Simpson: But the value mutability
part is the part I want us to focus on,
because that's the part I think that's
much more important with functional
programming.
Now, what we're doing with Object.freeze
is ensuring that nobody will change it.
But is that the important part?
Is it really important that we make it so
that it would be an error if
somebody tried to change it?
Similarly to the const keyword.
Is that the important part?
Is it the prevention
part that's important?
I don't think so.
What I think is really important about,
for example, using Object.freeze on
that array, is that I am signalling to
the reader of this code, don't worry,
it can't possibly be changed.
>> Kyle Simpson: It's adding to the level
of confidence that a reader of this code
will have.
That, I think,
is the most important benefit.
So when I have an array that I wanna pass
into some other function, if I just pass
it in as is, the reader of my code has to
be worried that somebody may change it.
If I Object.freeze it
before passing it in,
the reader of my code does
not have to have that worry.
It's less for them to be concerned about.
Makes the code easier to trust and prove.
If you wanna do real, immutable data
structures, that is, you need data
structures that will be able to not
only not be changed, but can be mutated
overtime by creating duplicate copies of
themselves or at least acting that way.
You're gonna want a real,
immutable data structure and
there are libraries that provide these.
Facebook has immutable JS.
There's another one that's
provided called Mori, M-O-R-I.
It's written by a guy named David Nolen
who's the maintainer of ClojureScript.
So he's really into the functional stuff,
and he wrote this Mori library.
There's several others out there as well,
so whichever one you like.
This was just an illustration here
of using immutable JS to create
an immutable array, AKA an immutable list.
You'll notice that I have sate and
newState, because when I create that
immutable list and
then try to use a new tater method on it,
like .set on line 2,
it will store that value with the list,
but it will not actually mutate
the thing that state is pointing at.
Which is why, on line 4, these two
are entirely separate objects, state and
newState will be different.
Now just on its surface,
that might sound like a great thing.
But it also might sound like it would
be super non-performant to have to
clone the array any time we
wanna add something to it.
And this is where the benefit of
immutable data structures comes in.
Because under the covers, immutable JS
is not going to clone the entire array,
they're gonna preserve the original list.
And any time you make a change,
like we did on line 2,
all they're gonna do is create a new
object that stores only the diff
between what it originally was and
what it now is.
Which is why on line, for
example, 6 when I ask.
I'm sorry on line 9 and
line 10 when I ask for state.get 42.
In the original one, it isn't present.
But in the new one, it is.
Because that diff has been
transparently under the covers.
>> Kyle Simpson: Represented, but
they didn't have to clone
the entire array to do that.
It's actually a little bit like Git,
if you know how the Git mechanism
works in any way shape or form.
When you commit a new
thing to a code base,
it doesn't recopy up all the files and
only copies up what change, so
that you can always see
the current state of those files.
That's kind of what's happening here.
Under the covers, it only stores
the diff between the original list and
this new list.
And we can always, as we do on line 12,
we can always get back out a real array.
If we, for some reason,
need a real array at some point.
But storing things in an immutable data
structure is one very powerful way
of ensuring that your state
changes are explicitly tracked,
not implicitly tracked.
Cuz you can imagine, if you pass an
immutable data structure into a function
and they try to change it,
they'll be getting back a new copy
of the data structure, but
it won't have affected you at all.
So you won't be able to mutate it,
somebody else won't be able to mutate it.
And if you want to mutate it,
you'll have to explicitly create
newState like we do on line 2.
>> Kyle Simpson: Immutable data
structures are very powerful, but
they're also kind of
a heavyweight solution.
So I would recommend, if your only goal
is to just freeze something, and it's
not ever gonna change again, it's just
a list of values, you want to pass it in,
and you want the reader of your code
to know that it's not gonna change.
Just call Bbject.freeze cuz that's
a very simple fast performing systems.
It's been around for
a really long time since ES5.
If you need this full power of tracking
changes to a data structure overtime,
use an immutable data
structure like this one.
>> Kyle Simpson: There's
something even more important than
what you pass in when you pass in a value,
it's when you author a function that
can receive a value from somebody else.
>> Kyle Simpson: [COUGH] Here I've made a
function that ostensibly its purpose is to
take in an array and
double all the values in the array.
If I alter this function this way,
I am creating a side effect
cuz I am mutating the array that they
passed in using the array reference.
This is a no, no.
We do not want to mutate other
people's values as a side effect.
So if I receive an array, I don't
know whether it's been frozen or not.
I don't know if it's an immutable
data structure or not, but
from the perspective of what I offer
on this code, I should assume that
I'm not allowed to change it
regardless of whether I can change it.
My treatment of somebody else's
value is just as important,
if not more important,
is how they treat my values.
My treatment of this list
value is incredibly important
to creating easier to read and
verify code.
So I shouldn't author my code that way,
I should instead author it as assuming
I'm gonna have to create a new list.
>> Kyle Simpson: And
I'm gonna double each value, but
I'm gonna store the value in the new
list and not mutate the existing list.
>> Kyle Simpson: You have to take care
to make sure that anytime you go to make
a change to something, you don't make
a change to something in a way that it's
going to create a side effect
that surprises somebody.
That's how you increase
the readability and
verifiability of the code
you are working with.
To review here immutability.
When somebody says that they could be
talking about assignment immutability or
they could be talking
about value immutability.
My argument is that value
immutability is far more important
than assignment immutability.
That's where you should
put your attention.
If we're weighting them, it's like
1% the assignment and 99% the value.
And the real reason for
that is that values are portable.
A value passed somewhere can be passed
anywhere, because we pass by reference.
An assignment, is local,
it is not portable.
Nobody else can affect that assignment
other than that immediate code.
So just by the virtue
of that characteristic,
the value mutability is
the much bigger concern.